Today, an incredible story of espionage,
but first an incredible sponsor message from skills share.
But my first question you has to be, do you have skills yet? I mean,
I really have talked about a great deal on this channel.
I've done many different spots like this for skills,
and that means that you guys like it because otherwise they were stop paying me,
which means that you go, I stick with it.
So it's probably really good. And I can personally confirm it is really good.
All right. So look, maybe you haven't got skills share yet,
and you are a totally skill this individual,
and that's great because there are 29,000 courses on Skillshare for you to level
up your design business, video, social media, or well, whatever skills.
There are a huge range. There's 29,000 of them. Me personally,
I've taken video production courses like I've talked about before.
I've also taken a class on how to go viral, which I was super skeptical about,
but it turns out it's totally legit. Uh,
lately I've been on a bit of a productivity binge as I wanna squeeze as much
as possible out of every day. That's just how I roll.
There is a great course on there from a go, I call Thomas Frank.
Who's also a YouTube by the way, are getting more stuff done in a day.
It's great stuff. It's worth checking out. If you wanna get more done in a day,
it's kind of right there. That's productivity. That's what it's about.
But yes, skill share, you know, just go do it. It's also,
you get two months for free. If you go through our link below, you know,
and if you Don like it, no big deal. Just cancel if you don't want it,
but I don't think you are canceled, cuz it's pretty awesome.
And it's only $10 a month.
If you don't cancel and you just continue with your subscription.
So that's great support biographics by supporting skill share.
It's a good thing to do link below two months for free for the first 500 people.
And let's get into our spice story.
If you have read the art of war by sun Sue,
or even if you only watched our video about sun Sue,
you will know that above anything else.
All war is based on deception.
The story that we bring you today shows exactly that this is the story
of three individuals who threw imagination,
cunning and sheer cheek were able to fool the secret services of half of Europe
at the height of world war II.
This is the story of the secret agent's code named Garbo and his
associates and how they brought about the greatest deception of the war.
This is ay story. So be prepared for lies for double crossing,
mysterious deaths, plot twists, and unreliable narrators. Now,
before I start, I do have two requests.
For those of you who already know the story of agent Garbo one,
please don't post any spoilers in the comments.
I know that you guys are like me, your watch of video.
The first thing you do is scroll down and see what the comments at the top is.
Please don't vote up the spoilers. It really does ruin the story. Number two,
I trust you guys. Number two, even if you know the story by heart,
please do give us a chance. Before you turn this video off,
we've probably found a couple of things that you didn't know about one of the
characters and why she deserves to be front and center. And look,
I promise we're getting on with the video,
but I do need to get another general warning. One.
There are plenty of Spanish names in this story.
I'm gonna do my absolute best to nail them. It's gonna be tricky.
I'm gonna do it though. Let's do it.
Let me introduce the first character of this story.
A little girl called Athelia go Kaba. She was born on the 6th of July,
1914 in Lugo Galia in Northwestern, Spain,
her childhood in upbringing were fairly happy and largely uneventful as she was
born into a well to do family. As she grew up,
athe started to attract the attention of boys around her because of her
astounding and fierce beauty,
which made her look a bit like a movie star athe Lee's life alongside the lives
of 25 million Spaniards changed forever on the 17th of July,
1936, when the civil war broke out.
Now I realized this is probably the first time we've ever talked about the
Spanish civil war on biographics.
So I'm just gonna go through it really quickly just to jog your memory about it.
The war pitted the legitimate Republican government in Madrid against a
nationalist insurgency headed by general Francisco Franco,
both sides were supported by foreign volunteers and governments.
The USSR provided aged to the communist. It is on the Republican side.
This Stalinist fact was often at ons with the less extreme elements within the
so-called popular fronts,
which led to infighting most notably in Barcelona and the Catalonia region.
On the other hand,
Italy and Germany were ideologically akin to Franco and the insurgents.
So they sent units from their armed forces to fight on their site in or
1939 Franco and his nationalist insurgents.
They claimed victory over the Republic.
The region of Galia had been quickly taken over by the nationalists at the very
beginning of the war,
meaning Lugo would be spared the horrors of being on the front line,
but there was still much to do on the home front.
So the surprise of those who knew this portioned rather spoiled girl,
athe enthusiastically volunteered in a military hospital in our hometown
emptying bed pans, peeling potatoes,
and above all experiencing firsthand the misery of a modern war.
She grew more mature after the experience and so decided to move away from home.
At the end of 1938,
her father found her a job as a secretary to the governor of bank of Spain in B
ergos, the acting capital for the nationalists.
It was here in February of 1939 that she met a young officer.
It was love at first sight. His name was Juan P.
Our second protagonist was born in 1912 in Barcelona into a progressive and
liberal family, Juan and his brothers grub influenced by their father's ideals.
Freedom tolerance love for your neighbor and rejection of violence with such an
upbringing. You would imagine that at the outbreak of the civil war,
the 24 year old Juan would join sides with the Republicans,
but reality is not so clear. Cut.
Juan did initially serve with popular fronts in Catalonia during the first
months of the war,
but he experienced firsthand the violent internal clashes between Republicans,
Stalinists and anarchists,
as well as the terror like tactics used in the struggled.
This caused him to dessert from the Republican army. And after a brief stint,
as a chicken farm into the French border, he joins the Francoist side.
He served with the nationalists until the end of the war as an officer in the
signal Corps. And as a nationalist officer, he met,
fell in love with and married the beautiful athe.
The civil war ended with Franco's victory. And five months later,
Germany invaded Poland for several months,
Germany and Italy tried to enlist Spain's help.
And that fight against the allies,
but Franco was no fool and kept out of the war,
allowing only a contingent of volunteers to join operation Barbara Rosa in June
of 1940, but let's not jump too far ahead just yet.
I'm going to rewind back to January of 1941.
When a beautiful young lady walked into a German embassy and managed to arrange
a meeting between a delegate and to husband, a veteran of Franco's army.
I'm talking of course about Athelia and Juan,
the German diplomats name was Gustav Lyner and he was the chief of the adva for
the Iberian peninsula.
The other was the intelligence service agency of the vere marked headed by
Admiral VI hem canis. Juan had a bold proposal for Lena.
He and aha would move to Lisbon then to London and off spy for the Germans.
What was the game of the Pols? Well,
it's possible to speculate that they did not agree with Spain's neutrality and
wanted to do their part in the war, but Lisner did not care about their motives.
The spine master was simply delighted to recruit a couple from a neutral country
who could move freely to Britain. A couple,
which included a former nationalist veteran, an officer of the signal core,
no less Lieser agreed to the deal and signed agents.
Frederika NAPE to won a crash course on intelligence work.
He was taught how to use invisible ink to write his secret reports that were to
be sent back to Madrid and to Berlin.
Juan also learns how to encode his messages using the enigma. Sys, finally,
he received instructions on what not to do.
He and athe were not supposed to do any actual spying themselves.
Rather they were to recruit a spy network amongst British and foreign citizens
who were sympathetic to the access. Cause everything it was set.
One last detail was missing. Juan would need a code name to sign his messages.
And they asked, well, do you have any preferences? Yes,
he had athe Bella or Abel for short
In July of 1941,
the P Joels were transferred to Lisbon after requiring false papers.
They flew to London and said to work.
Juan P Joel did not have any particular talents nor education,
but he did have the gift of the gap.
And his wife had a charming personality very quickly.
They started recruiting a network of spies,
some of them high up in the hierarchy of the British Admiralty and the ministry
of information.
The network included two Venezuelan brothers, Nazi sympathizes,
who were able to observe the Royal Navy's movements from Glasgow.
In November of 1942,
they were able to send an advanced warning of operation torch.
The allied landings in north Africa.
Another notable agent included a Welsh nationalist.
The founder of an underground fascist group called the brothers of the Aryan
world order,
which was operating in Swanzi south Wales in the spring of 1944.
The advert received the most valuable report so far from Abel,
the long VI allied invasion of France. It was on its way.
The joint British Canadian and American forces had created a new army group
called FUAC. This stood for the first us army group,
a formidable force numbering 11 divisions under general pattern FUAC was amasing
in Southern England and plans were being finalized for their LA landing in a
location in Northern France. Barbel was able to disclose that location,
which as we all know, was C all, was it.
Now at the beginning of this video,
I did mention that this story features some unreliable narrators and the first
one. Well, that would be me. You see so far,
I've told you the story from the perspective of Lieser and the other spies at
the ARB, but let's trace back.
One of the very first reports sent by Arabelle from London,
the Sid message folds back up into its envelope,
jumps back into the secure briefcase and then into the postal plane.
And so on until we are in the poo Joel's room in London with Juan
composing the message at his desk, the cool breeze moves the curtains,
allowing us to see just outside the window.
But what we see is not big Ben or pick a deli circus,
and Juan is not munching on some fishing chips. Now,
what we see is the tour de be, and the PJs are having breakfast with pasta DETA.
The fact is the PJs never left Lisbon for London. So what's going on?
Well, let's rewind even further to the start of the war in Europe,
even though Athelia and Juan were on the Francoist side at the end of the war,
neither of them was fully supportive of the regime.
Athelia simply found herself in nationalist territory while Juan had switched
sides as a reaction to the violence in bar loaner,
the young couple was concerned about the spread of Nazi ideology throughout
Europe and had decided that they needed to take some sort of action.
It's not entirely clear to us how they came to this idea,
but in the winter of 1940 to 1941,
Juan approached the British embassy in Madrid to offer his services as a spy,
as we all have heard in many, a job interview, Juan was told. Thanks.
So we appreciate the enthusiasm that we are looking for.
Someone with a little bit more experience.
What happened next was all thanks to athe genius.
The plan was to approach the Germans instead,
which happened successfully in January of 1941.
The idea was that they would offer toy for them. Instead, once one,
it gains their trust.
They could then contact the British again and work for them as double agents.
It's actually pretty brilliant.
Not only were they going to build up some work experience,
but they would be able to offer his majesty secret services, a valuable skill,
a channel of community occasion with the Ava to feed false information to in
July of 1941, they settled in Lisbon and never left for London.
But what about their spine network?
What about the Venezuelan brothers and the Welsh fascist?
What about the detailed reports, which earn one, the praises of the Ave? Well,
it was all fake a fabrication, Hoka, Popp hop, malarkey, cods wallet,
mumbo jumbo Juan's gift.
With words, transferred into writing.
He was able to compose from scratch more than 400 letters,
2000 wireless messages,
all based on magazines and newspapers available in neutral Lisbon with only the
help of his creativity.
He was able to create an imaginary network of spices to ensure that the aver
would trust Wan's that athe had another brilliant idea.
The advert in Madrid were unaware that she had left with Juan.
So she returned to the Spanish capital and met with Frederika NAPE.
She broke into tears saying that her husband had suddenly disappeared,
that he abandoned her. Then newborn son.
She knew that Juan had met with Fred Rico several times and maybe he could help
her finding him. Napa could not resist the tears of a beautiful young lady.
And he reassured her. Juan was in London,
carrying out a delicate mission on behalf of the Rike and athe should be proud
of him. And with that,
well now she had the advert in a pocket AHI and Juan were reunited once again in
Lisbon.
And he continued sending his coded messages to his I masters Juan's boldness and
sheer Chi got to the point of asking for pay raises from the adva blessed his
nonexisting agents stopped collaborating.
The pujas ended up receiving 20,000 pounds from the adva.
That's about 1.2 million in today's money.
Juan came up with the story that he had been offered a job in the ministry of
information. Thanks to some,
I called Brendan bra and a personal friends of the prime minister,
Winston Churchill. Thanks to this job.
He was able to get access to even the office of the Lord Admiral Lewis Mount
Baton by February, 1942,
I six began intercepting Abel's messages via ultra the decryption program at B
literally park that had cracked the enigma code.
They soon realized that a German agent was based in Lisbon,
but was actually pretending to be in London. He was also feeding the Ava false,
but credible information around the same time period.
Athelia planned her next move in a way.
She was the literary agent to Han's creative genius.
She produced evidence that Juan had secured the trust of the Germans and told
RSO that they were now willing to cooperate with of the British secret services.
Russo contacted M I six, who were now aware of Abel's activities. M I six,
agreed to recruit the pujas who received another code name.
This time B rail an operation was put in place to smuggle the pujas to drew
Balta and then to Englands Juan adopted a new look to avoid any chance of
recognition. He shaved his head and wore glasses and a beard.
Now I don't know about you, but I think he looks pretty great like that,
but I might be biased. Anyhow,
the pujas landed in Plymouth on the 24th of April,
1942 at the docs they were met by the third protagonist of our story.
The I five handler who would effectively become Juan's fellow co-author agent
Thomas Harris.
Now let's look at the events of 1942 to 1944 from the point of view of the
P drills and I five Harris, Chris and Juan,
with his third and final code name because of his ability to impersonate.
So many different characters on paper,
he was called agent Garbo after Swedish actress, Greta Garbo,
who was considered the greatest at that time,
P Joel and Harris' strategy was to continue building the Germans trust by giving
them so-called chicken feed, which is basically accurate military information,
but of little to no strategic value working together,
they wrote 315 letters averaging 2000 words. Each.
They also invented 27 subagents each with full life stories,
such as our old friends,
the Welsh fascist and the Venezuelan brothers in Glasgow.
According to the official history of British intelligence in world war II,
the Ava became so flooded with reports from the Garbe spy network that they made
no further attempts to infiltrate great Britain. In November of 1942,
Harrison puel did one master stroke to secure the Germans trust once.
And for all in anticipation of operation torch,
the allied landings in north Africa,
they compiled a report from the Venezuelans in Glasgow.
There's a convoy of warships had been seen leaving port in distinctive
Mediterranean camouflage. The message was sent by airmail postmark.
Well before the torch landings and times to arrive too late to provide the
German high commands with advanced warning, the information it was accurate,
but it was useless.
Still the Germans were delighted and communicated back to Garbo. We are sorry.
They arrived too late,
but your last reports were magnificent while Juan was writing away in the MI
five officers Athelia was adjusting to life in London, which was not easy.
Considering a second child had been born in the meanwhile.
Initially everything was pretty great. She even got to meet the Duche of Kent.
She also got to meet the prime minister, Winston Churchill,
but soon the long hours spent at home and nostalgia for her country of origin.
It took its toll in June of 1943.
Athelia wanted desperately to return to Spain and threatened Thomas that Les she
could do. So she would reveal the whole Garbo RS to the Spanish embassy,
Juan and Thomas had to act quickly and they concocted another plan.
And I five officer informed Athelia that Juan had been arrested following a
violent altercation with the spy masters, who he accused of mistreating her.
She was blindfolded driven to camp oh two oh the infamous MI five interrogation
center, where she had a TIFF or reunion with Juan who appeared disheveled and
downtrodden athe promised through her tears that she would do her best to
cooperate from that moment onwards.
All she wanted was for I five to agree to release her husband, the cunning plan,
it had been successful. And here is a lesson for all you newly wordss out there.
There is no marriage crisis that can't be overcome with the help of an overly
complicated plan and a convincing disguise and an I five handler
In January, 1944, Juan received a message from the adverb.
They knew that the allies were preparing a large scale invasion of Western
Europe.
They needed their best agent Arabelle to keep them informed of developments.
This set the stage for Garbos masterpiece. It was true of course,
that a massive landing scheduled for June, 1944,
operation LOR. The allies knew very well that its success depended on fooling.
The Germans on the exact location of the landing.
A parallel operation was put into place.
Operation fortitude and Garbo would be at its center between
January, 1944.
And D-Day over 500 radio messages passed from one to the Ava with
the intent of a concealing,
the real status of overlords preparations and B persuading Berlin that the
invasion force would land in C rather than Normandy. The deception.
It was made even more convincing by the invention of a ghost army Fu sack.
The 11 division supposedly led by pattern Fu sang was to be in the county of ES
east.
Londons the natural staging grounds for an invasion of C the allies even created
inflatable tanks and other bogus equipment to full German connaissance aircraft.
The German high command swallowed Garbos lies like chilled Bavarian beer on hot
evening. Normandy beaches were well defended of course,
but that was part of the Atlantic wall system of defense.
The majority of the mechanized divisions in Northern France,
they were kept at C ready to repel Fu sag D-Day it arrived on
the early hours of the 6th of June, 1944,
American British and Canadian forces stormed the beaches of Normandy.
The battle,
it was gruesome more than 4,400 men died on the allied side and up to 9,000
on the access side, but it could have been much, much worse under, uh,
in romel's insistence. The divisions were ready to move from call to Normandy,
but he was overruled by the commander in chief Marshall VA rote another report
from Abel or Garbo,
if you like it reassured high commands that the attack in Normandy was purely a
diversionary maneuver.
It was better that the tanks stay in C ready for patterns. Arrival.
Juan was so convincing that up until August.
The Germans kept two armored divisions and 19 infantry divisions in Cali,
ready to welcome pats ghost army.
But how did the advert react when the allies never landed in C? Well,
here's another Garbo masterpiece.
He that the diversionary maneuver in Normandy had been so successful that
the Cali invasion, it had just been aborted on July the 29th, 1944,
Juan received a surprising, further message from the Ava.
He had been awarded the iron cross by the fewer himself for his extraordinary
services to Germany. And as if one award was not enough in December of 1944,
Juan was appointed member of the order of the British empire by the security
services director general, sir, David Petri and recognition over services.
Juan AHI and Thomas had been at the forefront of an operation that had
guaranteed the allies victory in Europe.
It was one of those rare cases when actually the pen was mightier than the sort
Juan and AHI, they returned to Madrid. Juan became paranoid about the Germans,
finding out about his identity.
He heard some ex Nazis or neo-Nazis could exact their revenge Athelia was more
practical.
She just walked into the German embassy and Madrid and collected the last sum
due to Abel, which she knew was still waiting for them.
25,000 beaders or about $20,000 in today's money.
The couple then moved to Lugo. And from there to Venezuela,
this was Juan's decision who was still paranoid about being exposed as ay,
but life in Venezuela, it did not suit Athelia.
And the couple they grew apart by 1948,
they had formally separated and Athelia was living in Madrid with their three
children in a penthouse provided by the British government.
It was there that in early 1949, Quan,
apparently on a secret mission in Angola had disappeared,
was presumed deads in mysterious circumstances. His former handler and friends,
Thomas Harris had quit. I five after the war in the following years,
he could never shake off the suspicion of being part of the Sping known as the
PBI five,
a group of I five traders headed by Kim PBE who were spying on behalf of the
Soviet union. However, there is absolutely no evidence of his involvement.
Thomas died in a car accident in Maloca spare in 1964.
And for once it seems like there were no mysterious circumstances in the
meanwhile I Madrid athe had started building a new life for herself and the
children working as a guide and interpreter for the British and American
embasies in 1956, she met Anne fell in love with American entrepreneur,
Edward Chrysler, the former body double for film star Rudolfo that Latino,
who was now interested in developing the Spanish tourist industry.
The two opened a successful souvenir shop in the same year marries in 1958,
expanded into our galleries in 1965, all the while spying on behalf of the CIA,
at least according to rumors by the newspaper El PA ACE Edward formerly adopted
one. And athe three children who grew up in children of their own life,
just went on.
Francisco Franco died in 1975 king Juan Carlos' democracy was restored
and Spain hosted the football world cup in 1982.
Then on a September morning in 1984, Hare also known as Juan PRA Jr.
Heard something on the radio that left him stunned. Juan PRA agent Garbo,
the greatest Spanish spy was still alive and had just appeared in great Britain
in order to formally collect the order of the British empire that he had
received at the end of the war. This had been Quan's final roo.
He had faked his death with the help of British intelligence to then return to
Venezuela in Cognito and start again from scratch.
He had remarried in Caracas and had fathered three more children.
Juan was extensively interviewed by the Spanish media,
but never gave an explanation to his action except that he wanted to rebuild his
life. Maybe he had concrete reasons to fear retribution,
maybe from ex Nazis who escaped to south America,
or maybe it was just a way for him to divorce Puja style.
After all divorce was illegal in Spain until the 1970s.
And one thing we learned about Juan, if he could overcomplicate something well,
he absolutely would. Whatever the reason for his disappearance,
his children in Madrid welcomed him back and built a relationship which
effectively had never really been there before.
They even flew back to Venezuela with him and met their half siblings.
Our story ends shortly after this reunion, Juan died in 1988,
followed by AHI in 1990, both of natural causes,
Juan Puja Garbo is celebrated in espionage literature as one of the
great spies, if not the greatest spy of the 20th century. And well,
we're not gonna argue with that. Butaro theory.
Exploits have only recently been celebrated. And this is because, you know,
being a good spy, she was very good at keeping quiet.
So how about we remember both of them as the spies of the century before you go,
please do believe as a comment below.
If somebody was to film the story of Garbo,
who would you like to see in the leading roles do let us know below or the best
thing you can right now, go check out skill, share. It's amazing.
It supports this show. It's a good thing to do.
There is a link below two months for free for the first 500 people who do that.
And as always, thank you for watching.